Origins of Coal in North America

Coal is the very definition of a non-renewable fossil fuel. It was formed from the remains of plants that thrived in the sunlight that bathed the vast swamps and forests of the Carboniferous Period, which lasted from about 360 to 300 million years ago, near the end of the Paleozoic Era. Coal, then, is a product of solar power, the metamorphic remains of vegetation buried deep in the earth and subject to incredible heat and pressure over eons of time.

In the early 1600s, French explorers, searching for furs and other tradable commodities, first discovered deposits of coal along the shores of Grand Lake, in what was to be Acadia, in central New Brunswick, Canada. Rivers feeding the lake exposed veins of coal, which was easily gathered. By 1643, the French were trading with the British colony at Boston, exporting coal and other supplies.

Amongst North America’s earliest white settlers, coming for religious and cultural reasons, were a number of Welsh who had a great deal of experience in underground mining. In the late 17th century, as early as 1681, a group of Welsh Quaker settlers secured a land grant from William Penn. By the early 1800s Welsh were plentiful in Pennsylvania, bringing with them their valuable and detailed knowledge of coal mining techniques and technology. They knew all about ventilating underground mines, best practices for efficient extraction, and most important, how to keep miners safe; but the job of mining was always fraught with danger.

Everyday Cultural Diversity

Though the Welsh were among the earliest, a number of later immigrant populations also played indispensable roles in the coal mining industry. Bringing a wide range of diverse skills, workers from Ireland, Italy and Eastern Europe played particularly vital roles in shaping the US’s nascent coal mining industry.

I can personally attest to the cultural diversity. As a child, most of the adults I came in contact with had an accent of some sort. Most were from Italy or eastern Europe — Hungary, Poland, Czechoslovakia, Slovakia, Ukraine. Some Irish, too. Their influence on everyone and everything around me was profound and unmistakable. Old Country religions, social values and cultural morés made up the fabric of our lives. Nowhere was the evidence of cultural-cross-over more apparent than at the dinner table. We ate a minimally Americanized version of an Old Country diet — home-baked bread, cabbage rolls (halupki), pierogi, haluska, cannoli, paprikash, and fruit pies — not much that a modern American would recognize.

It was this vast inflow of foreign workers that made coal extraction possible on a huge scale, allowing American industry to expand to a scope and power previously unimaginable.

The contributions of immigrants from diverse backgrounds to the coal mining industry highlight the multicultural and multinational nature of early American industry and labor. Despite facing challenging working conditions and often enduring hardships, these immigrant workers played a vital role in meeting the increasing demand for coal, which powered factories, railways, and homes during the early stages of industrialization in the United States.

Hardscrabble Living

Again, I have personal knowledge of the hardships. When I was five years old, my dad got a job in a different mine, and we moved from the relative comfort of Gallatin to be closer to what he called the new ‘portal,’ where the mine company had driven a new opening, tapping into the ever present Pittsburgh Seam of rich bituminous coal that ran like a black, shiny, frozen river under our feet.

My dad bought us a run-down shack of a place in the middle of nowhere, a 4-acre homestead in rural Appalachian southwestern Pennsylvania, close to the new portal and tipple. Even though he worked every day, we were dirt poor. We had an outhouse, a hand-dug 18-foot-deep spring-fed well, lined with stones we carried from wherever we could get them in a rickety old metal-wheeled wheelbarrow. We had a hand pump in the kitchen for water. We had electricity in two rooms of our little old house. Each year we raised three pigs and butchered them every fall — smoked the meat in a smokehouse my dad built. We made sausage with a sausage press that was almost 100 years old. We had a goat to keep the vegetation manageable around the house and outbuildings. We had chickens for eggs and meat. We raised rabbits to eat. We didn’t raise beef — we had to feed cattle too long before we could eat them. We didn’t drink milk — it’s really not for humans anyhow.

We had an acre-and-a-half garden and we canned everything for the winter. Everything we could get our hands on. We picked blackberries and raspberries along the road, and made jelly. We picked up windfall apples and made applesauce and apple butter. We bought salt, and flour, and sugar, yeast for bread. Theoretically, we could have ground our own flour; many of our neighbors grew wheat.

No TV. One radio with poor reception. No incessant weather forecasts, no concerts and no football games. No streaming.

We had a few books.

And all the while we were scraping out a living, my dad worked in the mine, five, sometimes six, occasionally seven days a week, from before the sun came up till dinner time. When he came home at suppertime, still in his pit clothes, my mother fed him, and he went out and worked in the garden or tended the livestock, doing any number of absolutely necessary jobs that my mother and we kids couldn’t do.

When it got dark he came in, washed up, and went to bed, getting ready to do it all over again the next day.

In spite of all this I was happy as hell. We all were, for the most part. Except for my dad. We laughed all the time. but, my dad didn’t laugh much. He was always too tired and aching. Life was hard, but, for me, it was nonetheless fulfilling. We slept like logs and woke up early.

Coal As a Tradition

Our lives weren’t all that unusual. Most of the people we knew lived the same way. The country was built by people who lived that way, and had lived that way for a long time. From the very earliest days.

Relying on an increasingly large and diverse army of immigrant workers, coal mining began in Pennsylvania in the mid-1700s to support the colonial iron industry. By the 1800s, Pennsylvania coal was fueling the industrial growth of the entire country and was the primary fuel source for western Pennsylvania’s growing steel industry.

By the time my dad went into the mines in 1913, at the age of fourteen, anthracite (in the eastern part of Pennsylvania) and bituminous coal production (in the southwestern part of the state) was about to peak, which it did in 1918, with a combined annual production of 276 million tons.

During my dad’s prime working years, well into the mid-twentieth century, and my early childhood, coal dominated the energy arena, providing the power to fight two World Wars, a ‘police action’ in Korea, a ‘conflict’ in Viet Nam, and many other empire-building excursions and military and political interventions too numerous to name here.

The American steel industry began its slow decline in the late 1940s, and by the late 1970s, was pretty much dead. Ever-adaptable, coal was redirected from steel-making to electricity generation. At one point, coal provided nearly all of the nation’s electricity. Today, coal-fueled power plants still supply more than a fifth of the US’s electric power; more in some localities.